\begin{comment}
  mention Minimal Simulation guy
  
  
\end{comment}

\chapter{Method}

This experiment uses a two-dimensional, aquatic environment to test
what kinds of morphological changes may accelerate evolution. The
morphological forms---inspired by frog metamorphosis---have been
selected such that the conservation of the infant form to the adult
form may be varied. Figure~\ref{morphology} shows the two principle
forms which may be parametrically varied by two variables $l_t, l_f
\in [0, 1]$ tail length and foot length respectively.  The full range
of morphological change will be described in detail in
section~\ref{morph-change}.  In the inspiring case, the individual
begins as a ``tadpole'' bearing only a tail. It transforms into a
``frog'' with four limbs. Its task is to swim to a target with or
against varying currents.

%\begin{wrapfigure}{r}{0.5\textwidth}
\begin{figure}[h]
  \centering
  \figtitle{Body Plans} 
  \includegraphics[scale=0.4]{fig/forms.pdf} 
  \vspace{-30pt}
  \caption[Body plans]{\label{morphology}Body plans parameterised by
    tail length $l_t$ and foot length $l_f$. a) represents the infant
    ``tadpole'' form, and b) represents the adult ``frog'' form. }
\end{figure}
%\end{wrapfigure}

\section{Physics Model}

This experiment uses the following physical model to simulate an
individual in an two-dimensional aquatic environment.  The aim of the
simulation is to provide a water-like environment, but it is not
intended to provide a realistic environment such that a controller
evolved in simulation could be transferred to a real
robot.  \begin{comment} However, the same technique could be applied
  to a real robot.\end{comment}

The body is composed of six rigid bodies: one central body, one tail
segment, four feet segments.  The tail and feet are connected to the
central body by pinwheel joints.  Eight configuration variables
$\{q_1, q_2, \ldots, q_8\}$ describe the body as shown in
Figure~\ref{confvars}.  The position of the body is denoted by the
vector $(q_1, q_2)$.  The angle of the central body measured counter-clockwise
to the $\bf \hat j$ axis denoted by $q_3$.  The angle of the tail and
four feet are denoted by $q_4, \ldots, q_8$, respectively.  Eight
corresponding motion variables $\{u_1, u_2, \ldots, u_8\}$ describe
the generalised speeds of the body $u_i = \frac{d q_i}{d t}$.

\begin{figure}  
  \centering
  \figtitle{Diagram of Configuration Variables} 
  \includegraphics[scale=0.6]{fig/confvars.pdf} 
  \caption[Diagram of configuration variables]{\label{confvars}Diagram
    of the configuration variables $\{q_1, q_2, \ldots, q_8\}$ that
    fully describe the physical state of the body at time $t$}
\end{figure}

\section{Forces}

For each limb a drag force $\bv F_D$ opposes its direction of motion
which are given by Equation~\ref{drag-force-eq} where $\rho$ is the
density of the fluid, $c_d$ is the drag coefficient, $l$ is the length
of the limb, $w$ is the width of the limb, $\bhv n$ is the normal of
the limb, $\bv v_b$ is the velocity of the center of mass of the limb,
$\bv v_c$ is the velocity of the current, $\bv v$ is the relative
velocity of the limb in the current, $A$ is the reference area---an
orthographic projection of the limb shape on a plane perpendicular to
the direction of motion.  Figure~\ref{drag-force} shows these values
for a limb.  The shape of the limb is taken to be a rod of length $l$,
width $w$, and depth $d$.  However, for the purposes of computing the
drag force, the width of the limb $w$ is set to zero since $w \ll l$
and the force it might contribute is not considered significant.

\begin{eqnarray}
  A &=& l\,d~ |\bhv v \cdot \bhv n| + l\, w~|\bhv v \times \bhv n|\\
  w &=& 0 \\
  \bv v &=& \bv v_b - \bv v_c \\
  \bv F_D &=& -\frac{1}{2} \rho\,c_d~||\bv v||^2\,A~\bhv v \\
  \bv F_D &=& -\frac{1}{2} \rho\, c_d~ l\,d~|\bv v \cdot \bhv n|\bv v \label{drag-force-eq} 
\end{eqnarray}


\begin{figure}[h]  
  \centering
  \figtitle{Diagram of Drag Force} 
  \includegraphics[scale=0.7]{fig/drag-force.pdf} 
  \vspace{-45pt}
  \caption[Diagram of drag force]{\label{drag-force}For each limb determine
    length $l$, width $w$, depth $d$ (not shown), velocity $\bv v $,
    normal vector $\bhv n$ determine its drag force $\bv F_D$.}
\end{figure}

In addition, a drag force and drag torque is exerted on the central
body.  The full equations of motion are given in the
Appendix~\ref{physeqs-sec}.

\begin{comment}

\subsection{Collisions}

Interbody collisions are permitted, so limbs may freely move through
one another.\footnote{This is not thought objectionable because one
  can imagine constructing a robot with limbs arranged on planes such
  that they could pass each other unobstructed.}  However, the limbs
are constrained to not penetrate the central body.  When the angle of
a limb reaches $|q| = \frac{\pi}{2}$, an impulse force causes the
velocity to change directions and slow down.
\end{comment}


\section{Controller}

The controller used for the robot is a Continuous Time Recurrent
Neural Network (CTRNN).  The dynamics of a neuron $y_i$ is given by
Equation~\ref{ctrnn-eq} with time constant $\tau_i \in [0.1, 100]$,
weights $w_{ji} \in [-4, 4]$, bias $\theta_i \in [-2, 2]$, sensors
$s_j \in \R $, and sensor weights $n_{ji} \in [-4, 4]$.

\begin{eqnarray}
  \tau_i \frac{d y_i}{dt} &=& -y_i + \sum_{j = 1}^m w_{ji} \sigma(y_j - \theta_i) + \sum_{j=1}^s n_{ji} s_j \text{ for } i \in [1,5] \label{ctrnn-eq} \\
  \sigma(x) &=& \frac{1}{1 + e^{-x}}
\end{eqnarray}

\begin{table}
  \begin{center}
    \begin{tabular}{ | l | c | l | }
      \hline
      Sensor Variable & Value & Description \\
      \hline
      $s_1$ & $||(u_1, u_2) - (w_1, w_2)||$ & relative translational speed \\
      $s_2$ & $u_3$ & angular speed \\
      $s_3$ & $||target - (q_1, q_2)||$ & distance to target \\ 
      $s_4$ & $target_\theta$ & angle to target \\              
      $s_5$ & $q_4$ & position of tail \\                       
      $s_6$ & $u_4$ & speed of tail \\                          
      $s_{7 + 2 i}$ & $q_{5 + i}$ & position of each foot $i \in [0, 3]$ \\        
      $s_{8 + 2 i}$ & $u_{5 + i}$ & speed of each foot $i \in [0, 3]$ \\           
      \hline
    \end{tabular}
  \end{center}
  \caption[Sensors]{\label{table:sensor}Description of available sensors}
\end{table}

Table~\ref{table:sensor} describes the sensors.  A range finder for a
target is given by the $s_3$ and $s_4$ sensors.  Proprioceptive
sesnsors are given by the $s_5, s_6, \ldots, s_{14}$ sensors.  Five
motor neurons are used with weighted inputs from all sensors.  Each
neuron exerts a torque on an associated limb.  The torque for each
limb $T(q_i)$ is given in Equation~\ref{limb-torque}.

% XXX Also there is a boundary condition.
\begin{eqnarray}
  T(q_{i + 3}) &=& T_{max}~clip(y_i) \text{ for } i \in [1,5] \label{limb-torque} \\
  clip(x) &=& \begin{cases}
              1 & x > 1 \\
              -1 & x < -1 \\
              x & \text{otherwise} 
              \end{cases}
\end{eqnarray}

\section{Genetic Encoding}

The CTRNN controller is specified by a real vector gene $\bv g \in [0,
  1]^{105}$.  Each gene component $g_k$ is associated with one and
only one of the CTRNN parameters $\tau_i, w_{ji}, \theta_i, \text{ and
} n_{ji}$.  The $w_{ji}, \theta_i,$ and $ n_{ji}$ parameters are
linearly mapped from the domain of the gene $[0,1]$ to the domain of
each parameter.  The $\tau$ parameter uses a non-linear mapping
$\tau_i = 10^{-2 + 3 g_k}$.

\section{Morphological Change}\label{morph-change}

Morphological change is considered over phylogenetic and ontogenetic
time.  Two adult forms are evolved: A) frog with a tail $({l_t},
{l_f}) = (1,1).$ B) frog without a tail $({l_t}, {l_f}) =
(0,1).$ The control case is no morphological change denoted $An$ and
$Bn$.  The first experimental cases concern phylogenetic change
denoted $Ap$ and $Bp$, which are divided into phases $p_i$.  The
second experimental case concerns ontogenetic change denoted $Ao$ and
$Bo$.  Figure~\ref{morph-regiment} shows the tail length ${l_t}$ in
red and feet length ${l_f}$ in blue for each experimental case.
The exact values used are recorded in the
Appendix~\ref{morph-regiment-values}.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \figtitle{Variations of Morphological Change} 
  \includegraphics[scale=1.0]{fig/morph-regiment.pdf} 
  \vspace{-15pt}
  \caption[Variations of morphological
    change]{\label{morph-regiment}An, Bn have no morphological change;
    Ap, Bp change morphology over phylogenetic time; Ao, Bo change
    morphology over ontogenetic and phylogenetic time.}

\end{figure}

\section{Controller Variation}

In the test cases $Bp$ and $Bo$ the infant form is not conserved in
the adult form.  However, the controller may conserve some behaviour
acquired in the infant form that is useful in the adult form, which
may accelerate evolution.  To determine whether this happens, two
types of CTRNN controllers are considered: 1) a ``lobotomised''
controller, which has two independent CTRNNs, one for the tail; one
for the feet. 2) a ``non-lobotomised'' controller, which has one CTRNN
that controls both the tail and feet.  These are shown in
Figure~\ref{ctrnn-figures}.

\begin{figure}[h]
  \centering
  \figtitle{Variation of CTRNN Controllers} 
  \includegraphics[width=5in]{fig/ctrnn-figures.pdf}
  \vspace{-15pt}
  \caption[Variation of CTRNN controllers]{\label{ctrnn-figures}a)
    Fully connected CTRNN controller. b) Independent CTRNN controllers
    for the tail and legs.}
\end{figure}

The sensors are altered for the ``lobotomised'' controller.  The tail
brain does not receive proprioceptive sensors from the feet $\{s_7,
s_8, \ldots, s_14\}$.  Likewise, the foot brain does not receive
proprioceptive sensors from the tail $s_5$ and $s_6$.  Otherwise, the
sensors are the same.\footnote{Implementation note: the
  ``lobotomised'' controller is the same as the ``non-lobotomised''
  with a specific set of weights $w_{ji} = 0$ and sensor coefficients
  $n_{ji} = 0$.}

\section{Tasks}

To confirm the results are not spurious or a special case for one
particular task, multiple tasks of varying difficulty are considered.
The basic task is locomotion to a target.  Changing the target
location was considered, but it is hard to say what positions of the
target would be more difficult.  Instead of changing the target
location, varying the current of the liquid $\bv v_c$ is considered.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[scale=0.8]{fig/tasks.pdf} 
  \caption[Tasks]{\label{fig:tasks}Tasks shown in increasing levels of
    difficulty.  In task 1 the current assists the individual to the
    target.  In task 2 there is no current.  In task 3 the current
    pulls the individual laterally away from the target.  In task 4
    the current is directly against the target.}
\end{figure} 

